Good afternoon.
Welcome to WWDC.
I'm glad to see we have
quite a crowd today.
The development tools of Mac OS X mark
a new era for Apple computer in shipping
our operating system with tools included.
This appeals to our Unix community,
it appeals to all the
people who otherwise
would be working on other platforms and
have seen Mac OS X as a new strategy,
a new advantage.
In seeing this... I'm flubbing here,
excuse me.
In seeing this as a strategic
asset of the operating system,
we take in Mac OS X the combination
of our traditional ease of use,
our traditional user access,
we add development tools to it,
and that gives us the
opportunity to call ourselves
the ultimate development system.
In the hour to come,
we're going to be talking about all of
our various development technologies,
what we're doing now,
what we've done over the past year,
and what's to come.
And to do that job,
I'd like to invite my good
old friend and colleague,
Ted Goldstein, the Vice President of
Apple Development Technologies,
to come to the stage.
I've known Ted for, what is it now,
22 years, 23 years?
Ted has a long history in
development tools and compilers,
IDEs, and Java.
So, Ted, take the stage.
Thank you.
So I think I loaned Godfrey the
money for his first Mac back in 1984,
and it's taken me a little
bit longer to catch up to him.
The Macintosh and such,
we actually did a small development
on the Mac porting Smalltalk,
which I think also has a little
bit of history in common with
some of the Macintosh effort.
But mostly I've been a compiler
writer over these last 20 years.
And in trying to fit in with Apple,
people tell me I should take my coat off.
Should I take my coat off?
Is that... Okay.
Believe me,
you don't want me to take it off.
So what is development technologies?
What is the charter of this
new group within Apple?
And we're going to talk about that.
Try to give you a little overview
about some of the new thinking
around tools and such and how the
different pieces fits together.
And I want to actually give you a bit
of a progress report from where we are.
I invite some of my colleagues
up to talk about different areas,
give some interesting demos.
The way we deliver our
systems is with partners.
And extremely important in the tools
business is to work closely with
other third-party tools vendors
because Apple cannot do it by itself.
We really,
really do believe in collaboration,
that it's key to the efforts
to make things happen.
And I want to talk a little bit about
some new initiatives that we're going
to take some leadership on to bring in
technologies that's happening both within
Apple and outside into the tools space
because we think that all these things
need to combine together synergistically.
In fact, synergy is a very
important word in my talk,
and I'm going to use it probably, oh,
17 times.
Um...
Development technologies is an amalgam
of different tools and technologies.
And I think one of the things
that's extremely important for a
rich platform like the Macintosh
is to really build a big tent.
And by big tent,
what we mean is everybody
can come inside,
whether you're a Carbon and a
Cocoa developer and you are developing
the great desktop applications that have
made the Macintosh terrific for many,
many years now.
We also have appeal to the
multi-platform Java developers,
people who want to write one program,
develop one binary,
and ship it on Windows, on Unix,
on Linux,
and other non-Macintosh systems,
as well as Macintosh and Mac Unix,
of course.
And we think that this is a very
interesting dynamic where we have
the ability to take the same binary
from one platform to another and
the kinds of things you have to do.
Mostly we'll be talking about
that in my presentation.
My next session, number 400,
that follows immediately after this.
So I won't spend too much time in
this session talking about Java,
but it really is part
of the same department.
And we're looking to increase the
different synergies between Carbon,
Cocoa, Java, AppleScript,
and such all together to make a very
coherent platform for you to develop on.
One of the most important areas
I think that this new department
has is it combines together the
tools along with database systems.
And this means that we are
actually going to be looking
at and beginning to incorporate
database application programming
more closely into the standard way
to develop Macintosh applications.
Unix developers, of course,
extremely rich,
extremely terrific area because we have
really a very fine Unix experience.
It has the ability to run top and
all the command line tools and all
the rich Perl and Tcl environments.
And we get a tremendous amount of
benefit from the open source community to
bring these tools into the environment.
Many of these tools are
scripting languages themselves,
such as Perl and Tcl and Python.
And those tools are also now available,
of course, on Mac OS X along with our
traditional Apple script environment,
which we've enhanced to allow you to
create terrific new user interfaces.
Using Apple script.
Script Studio.
So,
for those of you in the room who are new,
and there must be at
least somebody besides me,
I want to just give a very quick
perspective on which technology and
which should you use for what purpose.
We believe Cocoa still is our
primary application platform now.
And it really is to create new
applications that are special
to the Mac OS X environment.
And really,
Cocoa gives you the most power
that you can get for the Mac OS X.
And it's well-designed with both
access to the Aqua user interface,
every possible feature is available,
and it has a terrific
object-oriented model.
One of the things which the richness of
using both Objective-C and the C language
allows you to blend the right power and
flexibility to really create the best
possible applications that we know of.
Carbon is our transition technology.
And it allows one to write
applications that run both on Mac OS X.
And as we saw earlier today,
Mac OS 9 is not something we really
want you developing much more for.
Nevertheless,
it was a fabulous technology that
allowed us to make the transition
from a non-preemptive thread operating
system to a preemptive thread.
Or from a cooperative thread operating
system to a full multitasking,
very rich, protected mode environment.
Carbon really was a very unique
environment and has allowed Apple to
make this extremely difficult transition.
And it has been fantastic.
And we're really fabulous at doing that.
Nevertheless, we feel that using Carbon,
you don't get everything possible
out of the Mac OS X environment.
Java, as I said,
is our cross-platform strategy.
We do a tremendous amount of work
to map it into Acquia interfaces
and into other Mac OS X features.
Nevertheless,
people who tend to write Java tend
to want to write something that is
platform-independent as opposed to
utilizing every possible feature.
It is, however, possible to write
platform-dependent code in Java,
and we don't frown on that,
but nevertheless,
that isn't the primary mission
behind the Java language.
AppleScript Studio is a new technology
we just released late last year.
And it is a user interface
application environment that works
with Interface Builder to rapidly
create new applications and
to rapidly evolve applications.
It integrates this AppleScript scripting
language into the Cocoa framework
and really is the second language
that really fully leverages
all of what Cocoa has to offer.
What I really like about this is that
sometimes the amount of time you spend
writing an application isn't that much
less than the amount of time using it.
Sometimes they're probably pretty close,
such as when you're developing
an application for one
person or a small department.
You don't really want to put in the
tremendous investment to write a C or
an Objective-C based application.
And AppleScript Studio gives you
the ability to write something
that is going to be used by a bunch
of people for a period of time,
but is going to evolve rapidly.
You see this a lot in
corporate environments.
corporate environments,
universities,
and for your own personal use.
And AppleScript Studio really
is tremendous at that rapid
prototyping RAD development.
And of course,
no Unix system would be complete without
talking about Perl and Tcl and Python.
These work on pretty much all
Unix application platforms.
And they're terrific in their place.
Some of these languages
actually do have bindings,
such as TkAqua,
that don't come from Apple directly,
but do support the Aqua look
and feel to the best they can.
So, Apple is still a
comparatively small company.
We can't do it all.
In fact, even I think some of the largest
companies these days don't try.
What we need to all do is to take
standards and to innovate on top of them.
We take the GNU compilers,
we take open source systems,
and we build upon them to create
extremely reliable systems
that then can span both our
platform and other platforms,
and to have the kind of
networking and interoperability
standards that people expect.
What's important about
this in the tools area,
of course, is we use the GNU compilers,
and we've been extremely fortunate
in leveraging the open source
foundations compilers of GCC and the
linkers and so on to create a rich
environment for you that runs both on
Mac OS X and our Darwin build systems,
delivery environments.
And so, this is an extremely
reliable environment,
and something that we get tremendous
benefit from is that you can help us
feed back and can take our knowledge
as well into your own systems to modify
it and customize it for your own needs.
But we don't think that's enough.
We think that it's also extremely
critical to provide a rich set
of graphical user interface
tools for rapid development.
This includes things like Interface
Builder and Project Builder
and Web Objects Builder.
And what these things do
is they eliminate the need
to write most of the code.
Interface Builder, you've seen, I think,
probably in the previous session.
Project Builder is our hub.
It is our programming environment that
all the other components plug into.
And Web Objects Builder is a tool
for working with a Web Objects
server to create rich two-tier and
three-tier web application services.
These environments like
WebObjects and Apache Tomcat,
these are fundamental tools
for any web application,
whether it's an HTML app
or new web services,
and we'll be talking about
that a little bit later.
So, I want to give you a picture of just
how the different pieces fit together.
Along the bottom there are the
series of languages that we
support directly from Apple.
They include, of course, C and C++,
Java and Objective-C, and AppleScript.
These languages form the basic foundation
that you as developers write in.
These languages themselves are
controlled and manipulated by two
different kinds of tools in this case,
Project Builder and Interface Builder.
Interface Builder, of course,
just does gesturing to layout components.
Project Builder integrates all
the resources of the environment
along with the build system.
And it also allows for very quick
and easy pathways to get to debuggers
and performance tools and such.
These other tools, the Performance Tools,
AppleScript Studio, and WebObject Tools,
they plug into these environments,
they leverage the resources,
and they are, in some sense,
the pathways off of
the main thoroughfare.
Project Builder and Interface
Builder really represent probably
a place where you'll be spending
a great deal of your time,
from time to time, once a week,
maybe once a month,
certainly before you ship,
we want you to run the Performance Tools.
If you're going to be
using AppleScript Studio,
using WebObject Tools,
it represents different
places to plug into.
We'll be adding more
tools as time goes on.
Finally, we think of it as that there
are four major categories of
resources that you develop.
Desktop applications, of course,
web-based applications,
and web-based applications themselves
come in both very light HTML-based ones,
browser-based applications,
as well as applications
that talk to a rich client.
Device drivers, of course,
because we are, of course,
a hardware company.
We want you plugging in
very terrific devices like
scanners and cameras and such.
And, of course,
other frameworks to take the knowledge
that allows for technology to be
developed and reused across many,
many applications.
[Transcript missing]
So with that,
let me introduce Dave Payne,
Manager of Mac OS X Development.
And he has the good fortune to
making good on all of my promises.
Thanks, Ted, and welcome to Apple.
So you've heard a bit about
what we're going to do,
what some of our priorities are.
I'd like to first start my talk
with reviewing some of what we
have achieved over the past year.
So if we look back, when we introduced
Mac OS X in March of 2001,
along with that,
we also had a developer tool CD that had
1.0 version of Project Builder on that.
We built the entire
Mac OS X system with that,
all the applications, the frameworks,
the device drivers, the tools,
the kernels built with GCC.
So it was a very full-blown
environment even at that point.
In May at the developers
conference last year,
we came out with a new
version of Project Builder in
conjunction with WebObjects 5.
So this developer tool CD provided
full support for WebObjects 5.
The next major release of the OS,
version 10.1 in September,
had an accompanying
developer tools CD with it,
where we added a lot
of new functionality.
Project Builder version 1.1 had
a lot of additional functionality
for indexing of your source code.
On top of that,
we built a class browser for C++,
for Objective-C, for Java.
We also provided integrated viewing
of the documentation for all the
frameworks on the system and for the
help for the developer tools themselves
and all the conceptual documentation.
We had a lot of other features
and enhancements as well,
but those are some of the major ones.
In more of the tools area,
we came out with a new language,
Objective-C++,
which is actually a language
that Next had had previously.
It's very important in
our context today as,
for example,
let's say that you're writing a
Cocoa application with Objective-C,
but you've got a library of C++ code
that's a compute engine for you.
Maybe it's even cross-platform.
It's much more convenient to be
able to interface between the
Objective-C for the Cocoa application
and the C++ in the library if
you can do it in the same file.
And that's what
Objective-C++ lets you do.
We also modified the library.
We've added a linker and loader
to provide a two-level namespace
feature that gets more correct
semantics for symbol binding.
In December 2001,
we had another developer tools CD.
The major feature of this
was Apple Script Studio 1.0.
This was promised at the
Seabold conference in September.
It was announced there that it would
be available by the end of the year.
There were enhancements in both
project builder and interface
builder to provide full support
for this exciting new technology.
and here at the developers conference
today you're actually receiving
two new developer tools CDs.
So, one, two.
Let's take a look at what's on these.
So the first of these is the
April 2002 Developer Tools CD.
So just going along in our series.
This is for use if you're running
and doing your development
on Mac OS X version 10.1.
Don't try to use this with Jaguar.
Major new features in this is the
beta version of Project Builder 2.0.
Why do we call it a beta?
Well, we want your feedback about some
of the new changes going into that.
We'll talk more about that.
There's a beta version of GCC 3.1.
The default compiler with
this CD is still GCC 2.95.
So even though we refer to
the CD overall as a beta CD,
if Project Builder is
working well for you,
you're free to go ahead
and build applications for
deployment with GCC 2.95.
Don't do that with GCC 3.1 yet
because we haven't fully finished
testing and optimizing it yet.
Also, there's an updated version
of AppleScript Studio,
version 1.1, in its final form,
and a lot of new documentation.
So, for example,
the Cocoa reference documentation
is now complete on this CD.
I was waiting for that one.
There's been a lot of requests for that.
The other CD that you're receiving,
the Jaguar Developer Tools CD,
this is the one that you would
use for development on the
Jaguar OS that you received.
Get the right side.
Of course,
you can build applications that
are compatible back on 10.1.
From the 10.1 system you can build
applications that are compatible forward.
With this CD,
GCC 3.1 is the default compiler now.
So again, it's still beta,
just as the OS itself is a beta.
The entire operating system
was built with GCC 3.
So we're very interested in your
feedback on the compiler so that we
can make sure that we work out any
remaining issues in the compiler
before we ship the operating system
and the tools in the final versions.
I'd like to review how we make these
tools available because there's a
couple of it that I think is not clear.
Most of you know that we
ship the developer tool CD in
the Mac OS X retail box.
We also now make the tools
available on new computers.
When you buy a new Macintosh,
the installation images of the
tools are already on the disk.
So you can throw it away easily or
you can go ahead and install it.
And most of you know that you
can download the tools from ADC.
We do stage how these come out
because it's kind of fun when I come
out with a new developer tool CD.
The network bandwidth just
takes us to our knees.
So we stage this software
seed key holders get it first.
Then Premier and
Select members can download it.
Then anybody can become an
online member and download it.
But if you have a slow network connection
and would like faster access to it,
there is a mechanism.
Go to connect.apple.com.
Send in your $20 and we'll send
you a CD of the latest content.
So...
Project Builder 2.0 is the
biggest change in Project Builder
since we first shipped it.
One of the most,
loudest pieces of feedback we
got about Project Builder was,
you know, I like the environment,
or I like the tools,
except that I feel constrained in
your all-in-one window environment.
A lot of us like it, but a lot of people,
you know, there's different people
have different preferences.
We have a new,
very configurable multi-window
user interface that really
lets you work the way you want.
We've got support for GCC 3.1,
so from Project Builder,
you can set up a pre-compiled
header mechanism.
We're using this new mechanism
called Persistent Front End that
now also works for C++.
And we've changed Project Builder
to understand all the new formats of
warning and error messages from GCC 3.1.
There's been a number of
improvements in the build system,
such as the ability now to
clone targets in your project.
So if you've got one target and you
want to make another one similar to it,
you can go ahead and do that.
So if you're working on a variety
of bundles that are similar,
for example.
I'd also like to remind you of the
build variant support that lets you,
for a single target,
build it in different ways,
so you don't have to clone
your targets in all cases.
There's been a number of
improvements in the debugger,
and we'll touch on some of this.
But I encourage you to go to the
Exploring Project Builder session on
Wednesday to learn more about the demo
that we're going to see at this point.
Actually, one more slide.
I'd like to review some of the
design point of Project Builder.
From the very beginning,
we've tailored Project Builder
for development for Mac OS X.
So everything that you use for Mac OS X,
concepts like bundles and
application packaging and frameworks,
are all very tightly integrated,
these concepts, into Project Builder.
If you have not read it,
I would strongly encourage you to read
the system overview manual to get full
details on what all these concepts mean.
So you can have a project that builds a
framework and that uses that framework
in an application in that same project.
With this IDE, we really try to leverage
the power of Unix that's on
the platform underneath it.
So, typically,
if you're doing Unix development,
you might write your own makefile.
We have a built-in build system
in Project Builder that relieves
you from having to do that.
But you may have pieces of open
source that you'd like to bring off
the net and add into your project.
You can have some targets in your project
that use our built-in build system,
or you can use what we call legacy
makefile support to use the built-in
makefiles from the other project.
If you are using our
built-in build system,
then you can take advantage of what
we call shell script build phases
that let you customize the build
at various portions so that you
can do interesting things there.
And then one additional major feature
that we use very heavily at Apple,
and I know that some third
parties very heavily use,
is there's a command line tool called
PBX Build that actually opens your
project within just a tool environment
and builds the project in exactly
the same way as the IDE itself does.
So you can script nightly
build processes with this.
It's very powerful.
And Project Builder also
facilitates team development.
So, of course, as you would expect,
your application preferences
are stored per user.
But also for each
project that you create,
every user gets their own per
project preferences there.
So I can have my
breakpoints stored with it,
my bookmarks, my window layout.
You can have yours
stored with it as well.
And Project Builder fully integrates
with the CVS version control system.
So you can use this to
build your own project.
So you can use this to actually
check in your profile preferences or
project preferences if you'd like.
So now let's go ahead and I'd
like to introduce Mike Ferris,
the manager of the Project Builder team,
to give you a quick demo of some of the
new features in Project Builder 2.0.
Thanks, Dave.
My job here this afternoon is
basically to give you just a little
taste of what we've been doing
in Project Builder recently and try
to entice you to come to some of
our later sessions during the week.
In particular, on Wednesday we have our
Exploring Project Builder session,
and if you're interested in PB,
I encourage all of you
to attend that one.
So,
As Dave said,
one of the big pieces of feedback that
we got with Project Builder is that not
everybody likes everything in one window.
So this is the way that Project Builder
has looked since we built it.
When I open source files,
they appear in the one window.
I can move between the files that
I have open in a relatively easy way,
but I'm pretty much
seeing them one at a time.
I do my finds within this window.
I can debug within this window.
Everything is very self-contained here.
Some people like this, some people don't.
Well, now we have an answer
for the folks who don't.
This new Preferences panel is where you
can configure what the user interface for
Project Builder is going to look like.
We have three main default choices:
Single Window,
you're all familiar with if you've
used Project Builder before,
that's the way it's always worked.
The new Some Windows configuration.
The Project Window still has a
built-in editor in this configuration,
but all of the tools like finding
and building and debugging,
these sorts of things have
been moved into separate
windows in this configuration.
and then there's many windows.
The project window does
not have a built-in editor.
All of the tools, finding,
building and debugging,
all these are in separate windows.
It turns out that these
three choices are just...
The first thing we want to
talk about is the pre-set
configurations that we've provided.
Behind that is a lot of configurability.
We've defined what we feel are the set
of development tasks that all of you do
all the time as you're building projects.
and for each one of those you
can assign a different window
template that's set up exactly
the way you want it for that task.
Multiple tasks can
share the same template,
even the same window,
or they can all be in separate windows.
And you can create your own templates,
set them up exactly the way you want.
But for now,
let's just stick with the built-in
many windows mode and I'll show you
what that same project looks like.
So here we have the project window again,
no attached editor.
As I open up files, each one appears,
each in its own window.
Okay.
If I do a find, I get a find window.
So, okay, well, since we're already
looking at the find window,
let me show you something else.
This...
What I've been showing you so far is in
both of the CDs that you've received.
What I'm about to show you is
only in the Jaguar pre-release CD.
It didn't make the April Tools CD.
So play with this, with the Jaguar seed,
but don't expect to find
it in the 2.0 April tools.
We've always had integration with Define
to be able to search for references,
API definitions, and so forth.
But if you don't know what the
name of the method or the function
is that you're looking for,
we've kind of not had
a solution for that.
What we've added is a natural language,
content-based search of
all the documentation.
So I can type in, if I can spell it,
tell me about view hierarchies.
and David I'll get a
weighted set of results.
The ones that it thinks are
the most relevant up top,
of course, just as you'd expect.
And as you can see,
the second one looks like
it's pretty appropriate.
This is a whole document
on view hierarchies.
And we can load the
documentation up right here,
pictures and all.
So this is a way,
if you're unclear on exactly how to
accomplish what you want to accomplish,
you can look for it in a sort
of a more concept-based Okay.
So, again,
this is just a small taste of what we've
added to Project Builder and what we're
continuing to add to Project Builder.
And with that,
I guess I'll give it back to Dave.
All right.
Thanks, Mike.
So as we said,
this is a beta version of Project Builder
because we are interested in your
feedback about the user interface
and whether this works for you.
It has been available
on the April 2002 CD,
so we have received a lot
of feedback about it so far,
and it's all been really great so far.
So thanks, Mike.
Okay.
You know, actually, Dave,
there is one more thing
that I could show here.
Okay.
This actually isn't on either
of the CDs that you have,
but it's something that
we've been working on.
And we're not exactly sure whether
it's going to make the Jaguar
release or not at this point,
but, you know, bear with me.
You know, I'll show it to you anyway.
So one of the things that
people have asked for is some
features that MPW used to have.
People really like from
MPW the shell environment,
the sort of the non-linear shell,
being able to use a mouse-based editor
to write your shell scripts and,
you know, select things and execute them.
And we like that too, and so we've been
meaning to work on this,
and since so many of you
have been asking for it,
we've finally gotten
around to working on this.
Here's a shell script,
or hunks of shell script,
and just with a keystroke,
I can execute any shell
script within this window.
The output comes.
I can do something that's
a little bit more verbose.
Let's actually--this
is a little bit silly,
but let's do a command line build
from within Project Builder.
So here we go, we're building,
we're building.
And you know, I can scroll around in
this thing and you know,
whatever, the output is coming.
The window where the output is
going while a shell is running
is blocked from further editing
while that shell is running.
Anything else, though,
you can continue to work.
Okay?
All right.
What if I want some UI with my script?
Well, we have AppleScript, right?
And we have this tool called OSAScript,
which allows us to, from a shell script,
invoke some AppleScript.
So here's one that will actually do a
search over all of the Cocoa examples,
but first it needs to
know what to search for.
So when I execute this,
the first thing it does is it
asks me for a search script.
And once I enter that,
it goes off and it does the search.
So this is all fine and good, right?
But you don't necessarily always
want to have this window open with
all these scripts in it and go
and select them and execute them.
What if you have a script that
you want to execute all the time,
over and over and over again?
Well, the logical thing would be to
create a menu with that script.
So here's a script.
This is just a script.
But when I run it,
notice it adds two menus to my menu bar.
Now let me open up a source file
because I have some scripts in my
menus that are best shown with source.
So one of the simple,
these are again just examples, right,
but you know,
there's some cool ones so I'll show them.
We have one that just
comments the selected text.
We can uncomment it, fine.
Here's one that's a little bit cooler.
I can select a couple
of instance variables.
and I can say, you know,
generate me accessor definitions
for those instance variables.
And it puts them on the pasteboard
in this particular case,
and if I go and I paste them in,
you'll see that it generated the
standard Objective-C getter and setter
methods for those instance variables.
So we have, you know,
a certain amount of power to
actually get in here and edit,
you know, within buffers and project
builder using scripts,
you know, take your input and pipe your
output and all this kind of stuff.
But again, because we have
AppleScript available to us as well,
we can involve other apps in this thing.
So let's say that I, you know,
want to know what this
thing is talking about.
What is a design pattern?
Well, what if I just go and search
in Google for that term?
And of course, it doesn't work.
Am I not hooked up to the Internet here,
perhaps?
[Transcript missing]
Again, this is just some examples,
but give you an idea of some
of the things that we've been
working on and that we hope to
deliver to you in the near future.
So, okay, now I really am done.
Thanks, Mike.
So there's a lot of exciting stuff
going on with Project Builder.
Again, I'd like to emphasize that some
of what you just saw there,
we're not sure whether we'll get
into the final version of 2.0 or not,
but it will be coming
along in the near future.
So,
moving on to touch on some of the changes
in some of the other development tools.
You've seen Interface
Builder this morning.
You'll see and hear more
about it in this session.
It's our tool for building AQUA-compliant
user interfaces using design guides to
help you get things set up properly.
For Carbon,
it's the best way of taking advantage
of the Carbon high-level event model.
For Cocoa, it really leverages the
Cocoa outlet and action paradigm.
And now, when you're designing
for Apple Script Studio,
this is the tool you use for that.
So, in Jaguar,
we have Interface Builder version 2.3.
It takes advantage of Jaguar's
new Cocoa archiving mechanism.
So,
there's actually three different ways,
I believe it is, to store the nib files.
This one, in the future,
will give better forward and
backward compatibility of
nib files as Cocoa evolves.
In addition, over the past year,
some of the major changes in
the code are the code that we've
been using to store the code.
Some of the major changes
that have happened in recent
releases with Interface Builder,
the ability to have typed outlets.
So, now all of your user interface
elements don't have to just say ID.
They can have specific types
that let you do better type
checking in your source code then.
Views can be popped out of containers
and dragged to other containers.
If that's within the same nib file,
then it actually retains all
the connections from those
views to your source code,
which can be very helpful.
You can group user interface
elements and lock the position and
size of user interface elements.
To learn more about how to use Interface
Builder with all these enhancements,
go see Henri's session on using
Interface Builder on Thursday.
We've touched on GCC 3.1 a
number of times so far today.
We've got the new persistent
front end for faster build time,
so read the release notes for
GCC 3 and for Project Builder to
see how to take advantage of this.
We've added a lot of language compliance,
much of it coming with GCC 3 itself.
C99 compliance, full ANSI C++ compliance.
and now a full implementation of
the C++ standard template library,
which has been something a lot
of people have been requesting.
And we've done a lot of work on code
generation both at Apple and within
the Free Software Foundation community
to improve the code generation.
And our benchmarks are now showing,
for example,
that the AlteVec code is now the
fastest of any compiler for Mac OS X.
So to learn more,
see the compiler development
session on Friday.
On the debugger front,
most of you know we take
advantage of GDB under the covers.
We've done a lot of work on
robustness and performance tuning
for the debugger over the past year.
In addition, we've got some new features.
We're adding the ability now to see
the contents of opaque data types.
So, for example, NSStrings.
We'll be expanding that
out to NSDictionary's,
NSArrays.
We're not in either of
the CDs that you have,
but in the debugging session on Friday,
we will demonstrate an
expression watch window,
which we'll be adding.
Make it easier to see your
global variables or other
values of other expressions.
And we also have now
in the underlying GDB,
we've enabled support for hardware
watch points using page protection.
So this can help find
memory stomper bugs,
for example.
In the performance tools area,
Avi this morning mentioned that
you should really take advantage
of the performance tools.
We've got a lot of them in Mac OS X.
I'm not going to begin to
go through all of these.
Many of them you may
have heard about before.
I'll highlight a couple of these.
Down in the bottom right,
you see the OpenGL Profiler.
This is a really cool new application
for if you're doing OpenGL coding,
seeing exactly what's going on with your
graphics calls and where your time is
being spent and help you optimize that.
Mac OS X is the only platform
that has any tool of this nature.
There's also some other tools
for more processor-level
monitoring of the performance.
So there's a couple of sessions on,
I believe it's Thursday afternoon,
on performance tools.
So performance tools and
optimizing for OpenGL.
So again, to review some of our
near-term priorities,
we're going to be working hard
to improve the build times
with Project Builder and GCC3,
working hard on even
better code generation.
We've had a lot of requests for
extensibility APIs in Project Builder.
We can't do it all.
Many of you have requested the
ability to enhance our efforts,
if you will.
We'd like to let you do that.
As Mike demonstrated,
the command execution worksheet is
something we're working hard on,
and more debugging features.
We're also working on a script for
migration of source code from Projector
repositories into CVS databases.
So some of you may find that useful.
And with that,
I'd like to turn it over to Godfrey
to talk about third-party tools.
Thank you, Dave.
and David S.
Goyer will be joined by the
first-time Mac OS X developer,
David S.
Goyer.
One size fits all doesn't really
work for Apple just the way it
doesn't work for anybody else.
So we work very closely with
our third-party tool vendors,
both to give them engineering directions,
which includes seeding
pre-releases of the operating
system before other vendors,
because you're dependent upon them.
As appropriate, we give them seeds,
we tell them about new
technologies coming up,
and we try to make sure
that we coordinate with them
also on a business front.
Our partnership management group works
with them in the individual market
spaces to be certain that both they and
the market space that we're working in
know about the tools available there.
Now we've seen a lot of activity in the
past year as Mac OS X has rolled out,
as we've moved through the
various versions incrementally
to 10.1.3 and now 10.1.4,
and a selection of them are here
during the week at our vendor fair,
exhibit fair that opens
this evening at 5 p.m.
We've had a lot of activity in the
past year as Mac OS X has rolled out,
as we've moved through the
various versions incrementally
to 10.1.3 and now 10.1.4,
and a selection of them are here
during the week at our vendor fair,
exhibit fair that opens
this evening at 5 p.m.
[Transcript missing]
Basic is a development platform in
heavy use on the Windows platform.
We hear all the time this story
that there are three times as
many applications available for
Windows than there are for Macintosh.
Apple has chosen not to go into
the basic development world because
we have an excellent third-party
partner who's doing that scene for us.
And to talk about that,
I'd like to bring up Geoff Perlman
from Real Software to talk
about Real Basic for Mac OS X.
Thanks, Godfrey.
So, um...
get to the next slide.
Ah.
Okay.
So what is Real Basic?
Real Basic is a cross-platform
development tool.
I want to clear up one misunderstanding
that some people have about our product.
It's not interpreted.
There's no byte code.
It compiles to machine code on
all the platforms we support.
It's fully compiled.
It provides a modern object-oriented
language using a dot syntax,
supports inheritance,
it supports polymorphism,
virtual methods,
constructors and destructors,
all the kinds of things you
come to expect from a modern
object-oriented language.
It also provides a native
UI and native performance on
all the platforms we support,
which means that when you're
compiling your application
for classic Mac OS 8 and 9,
you get that UI.
If you're compiling for Mac OS X,
you get Aqua.
If you're compiling for Windows,
be it 95 or XP, you get the native
UIs for those platforms.
and Real Basic provides you with a rich
set of intrinsic functions and classes.
We provide you with things like 3D APIs,
printing APIs, QuickTime APIs,
APIs to access sound and pictures,
graphics, all kinds of multimedia stuff.
And the idea here is that
you're abstracted from all
the platform specifics.
So you can write one set of code
and deploy it on all the different
platforms that we support.
and we provide a
cross-platform plugin API.
So if you want to use some
of your existing C++ code,
you can write plugins that'll run on
all the platforms that we support,
which is really great.
We don't claim the real basic will do
everything we necessarily want it to do,
so that's why we provide a
plugin API just for that.
And finally,
the whole point of cross-platform
is to write a single application and
deploy it in many different places.
In our case, we support Mac OS 8,
Mac OS 9, Mac OS X,
and Windows 95 through XP.
So what's new in Real Basic?
Well,
there's a bunch of new things that we've
been doing in the last few versions.
We support core graphics text
rendering across the board
everywhere in Real Basic.
We have a new edit field
using AtSui at the low levels,
so you get multilingual
support through our edit field.
And, of course, core graphics through
our edit field as well.
And for those of you that
have done that in Carbon Apps,
you know how much work that is,
and we've taken care of all
that for you in our edit field.
And we've got external project items.
External project items allows you
to share anything that could be in
your project among multiple projects.
That means classes, class interfaces,
windows, modules, pictures, sounds,
quick time movies,
anything at all that you can put
into a Real Basic project can be
shared among several projects.
And they're stored as external files,
actually sort of as aliases,
which means that any changes you make
in one automatically will be in any
other projects that you're building.
Another nice thing about this
feed is that it's not just a file.
It's a file.
We also have an interactive shell.
We have a shell class that lets
you talk to the Unix shell.
And this is really great if you want
to do something as simple as put a nice
UI on top of a series of shell commands.
It's really great for that.
For example, one of our engineers put
a nice UI on top of top.
And it took him about
maybe 20 minutes to do it.
and we do things like, you know,
we do the hard work for you.
For example, for Carbon,
serial ports aren't supported.
Well, we've done the work to make
them supported in RealBasic.
So that means you can use our serial
port API to write applications
and talk to serial ports on 8,
9, 10 and, of course, on Windows as well.
and hundreds of API-- or excuse me,
hundreds of IDE,
intrinsic library improvements,
et cetera, across all of Real Basic.
We've added Regex, for example,
to Real Basic.
We've got a dictionary
class in Real Basic.
And as I mentioned earlier,
we have a fairly extensive 3D API that
abstracts you from OpenGL on Mac OS X,
QuickDraw 3D on Mac OS 9,
and OpenGL or some
other render on Windows.
And finally, where are we at WWDC?
Well,
we're at the exhibit fair in Hall 1.
We have a Birds of a Feather session
on Tuesday from 7:39 in Room K.
And we have the lunch
presentation on Friday in Hall 2.
I wanted to mention one last thing that
I didn't put a bullet point up for.
You know, people ask us,
where are you guys going with Real Basic?
Well, I want to tell you real quickly
about some of our future
directions for Real Basic.
One is we're working on
Mac OS support for Real Basic.
So you'll be able to
create Mac OS executables.
We're working on version control.
So Real Basic in the future is
going to have tightly integrated
version control for team development.
Unicode support across the board.
Things of that nature.
So, for example,
more platforms and perhaps the
ability for you to write things
other than just applications,
like CGI's, plug-ins,
those sort of things with Real Basic.
So come visit us here
at WWDC and thank you,
Godfrey, for the opportunity.
Thank you very much, Jeff.
Great work from Real Basic folks.
Some weeks I've gone to Version Tracker
and taken a look and about 40 to
60% of the new applications being
announced are all written in Real Basic.
So it's a very, very strong environment.
With that,
an overview session for development
tools on the Macintosh simply wouldn't
be there incomplete without a word
from our friends from MetroWorks.
And to fill that, I have Matt Henderson,
the technical lead for
the CodeWarrior IDE,
here to speak.
and David Levy will be joining us.
Just a quick introduction for any
of you that might not have heard
of MetroWorks or CodeWarrior.
In 1993,
we built a new development environment
from scratch to help support the
transition of Apple from 68K to PowerPC.
That was a very traumatic time
for Mac developers and CodeWarrior
was probably the first compiler
available to the general audience of
Mac developers for PowerPC development.
It was very successful.
Virtually all of the PowerPC commercial
applications that were built
for the initial PowerPC hardware
were built with CodeWarrior.
And that trend has continued.
And in 1997,
we added support for Mac OS X.
Right from the very earliest
announcement of Rhapsody,
we've been on board with Apple's
next-generation operating system plans,
even to the point of adding
Objective-C when they were talking about
Yellow Box and there was no Carbon yet.
And to this day,
our support for Mac OS and
Mac OS X have paid off and most
commercial Mac OS applications
are built with CodeWarrior.
Some recent releases include Photoshop 7,
Alias Wavefront Maya, Office 10.
All of these things built with
CodeWarrior are great applications.
And that's what we love to do is to
empower developers to build great
software for Mac OS and Mac OS X.
And so with that, I'd like to talk about
CodeWarrior for Mac OS version 8,
which is coming soon.
In fact, it's coming May 31st,
so pre-order at the show.
But, you know, quickly,
I'll go with some cool things in 8.0.
Avi Tevanian plugged Mako this morning.
He said, get off CFM and on to Mako.
We're here to help you.
We've got a new, completely rewritten,
faster Mako linker that's based on
our proven PEF linker technology.
Our old Mako linker was based on
the Apple Darwin open source linker.
It was kind of old, kind of slow.
The new Mako linker is very fast,
very...generates very tight executables.
You should see the executable size
for Mako applications using our new
linker go down from anywhere to a
half to a third of its original size.
Also, because it's our linker,
we use Sim for debugging
symbolics instead of stabs.
Sim is actually an Apple-designed
debugging format that we adopted
in the early days of PowerCon.
It's a very small PC,
and it's very small, it's very compact,
and it allows for greatly
improved debugger performance.
So we're very happy to
have Sim for Mako apps,
and it tremendously improves
the Mako debugging experience.
But combined with a new linker,
I think that you'll find that the
turnaround time from the time you
make a change in your source code
to the time that you've built it,
linked it, and are debugging in
Mako land to be much,
much shorter than it
was in Code Warrior 7.
Another cool thing, cool feature for 8,
custom debugger data viewers.
So we have two sorts of things for this.
One is a data-driven way of defining
the display format for your variables.
For example, for the STL string class,
we defined some simple XML code that
will tell our debugger that when you
see a string object in our debugger,
you really only want to
see the string value.
You don't want to see all the member
variables and have to dig through
it to find what the string is.
But even beyond the
simple data-driven way,
you can actually write some
plugins to our debugger to
produce whatever representation
of your data types that you want.
Some of the examples that
we're providing is regions.
So if you wanted to
see what a region was,
you can double-click it in Code Warrior.
It'll pop up a window that
will draw the region for you.
You can look at it, see what it is,
see what its bounding box is.
And none of this trying to
define what your region is
based on just the simple flat...
and David Schmuck are also featured.
Another great feature:
C++ and Java code completion.
No more digging for header files.
Type the first few characters
of a function name,
hit control period.
It will bring up a little window
that shows you all the possible
functions that it could be.
From there, you can pick a function,
it will insert it in your code and
you can go on to the parameters.
It will look up the parameters for you.
So as you type,
you can see the function definition
and the parameter types and know what
to fill in and not worry about digging
through your source hierarchy to find it.
Next great feature: Cocoa support.
We worked very closely with Apple's
interface builder team to integrate
the Code Warrior IDE and interface
builder so you can use them together.
So now instead of using project
builder and interface builder together,
you can use interface
builder and code warrior.
this is great by using-- and
we encourage-- I know there are
a lot of Cocoa developers that
are still using Apple tools,
and we hope that they'll
consider Code Warrior because
of our faster build times,
you know, better code generation,
smaller executables, et cetera.
And there's much, much more.
We've added a ton of features.
This is one of our biggest
feature releases in a long time,
and I mentioned that it's
available on May 31st.
And with that, we'll plug what we
have at the show today.
Tomorrow we have the
Metro Records lunch presentation.
Apple has very generously given
us an hour of lunch time to
show off all our cool new stuff.
It will be here in Hall 2.
I encourage you all to come.
We'll have a lot of demos.
We'll have Berdina Barada, our CTO,
leading you through most of that.
We have a Birds of a Feather
session tomorrow night,
7:30 to 9:00 p.m.
We'll have a number of
the Code Warrior engineers
are here at the show,
and they'll be answering your questions.
So come to Hall 2.
You can ask any of the
Code Warrior engineers,
find out the product,
make feature requests,
complain about your favorite bugs,
do whatever.
Tuesday and Wednesday we're
running the Code Warrior Lounge,
if you remember that from years past.
So come in, hang out.
We've got a pool table.
We'll have online stations
where you can preorder Pro 8.
It's in the Hilton Plaza room.
And finally,
we have the Metro Works booth
in the exhibition hall that's
during the exhibits fair.
So it's open standard exhibition hours.
And with that,
I'll give it back to Godfrey.
Thank you, Matt.
So some great stuff.
I'd like to bring Ted back now to talk
about future initiatives for Apple tools.
Three topics to touch on very quickly.
Database integration, Objective C,
futures, and web services.
One of the new things in the
Jaguar seed is ODBC connectivity.
We're bundling, as part of the
Darwin level of the system,
an open source solution from
a company called OpenLink.
They make something called
IO-DBC Driver Manager.
For those of you who have ODBC databases
and applications that use it,
this is a way to get these
different services to plug together.
It works with many
third-party ODBC drivers,
including FileMaker and such,
and it's really great
for legacy development.
ODBC has been around, I think,
since Windows 95 or something.
But much more important to that is
our Enterprise Objects Framework.
And what this provides is an
object-oriented database access,
or rather, access in an object-oriented
fashion to relational databases,
more accurately.
And it allows you to use Interface
Builder to easily connect the
data objects in the database using
the schema-driven information
to the user interface widgets.
We're going to briefly touch
on where it's been in the past,
where it is today,
and where we want to take it.
So in the past,
EOF has been very popular and
it's been around since next days.
It has very clean Objective-C integration
with both Cocoa and Interface Builder.
People are extremely highly productive.
But it had very limited
database adapters.
If Apple or Next didn't
write the adapter for it,
it didn't exist.
And so it really meant that it
only worked with a limited number
of databases and the performance
wasn't always everything you
might want it to be because,
in fact,
one of the big issues to writing a good
multi-tier application is to really
use some of the low-level I/O features
in the database adapter system.
So, the third problem with EOF in the
past was that it was really tied only
to older versions of web objects.
This meant that in order to get it,
you had to license a copy of
web objects for every client
application you may want to ship.
EOF in the present now uses Java.
And it uses Java so that we can
leverage the Java community and
their use of database systems.
And there's a very important
initiative in Java called JDBC,
Java Database Connectivity.
And what that does is it provides
us with a very rich set of adapters
that are plug-compatible with Java.
The downside, of course,
is it does require that
Objective-C programmers do
a little Java programming.
And this is, you know,
may not be the most positive thing
with an Objective-C programmer.
And I'm going to show you a little
bit of code and talk about that.
One bit of good news about
EOF today is that you can now get a
redistribution license available today.
And so that's one nice bit,
nice new thing.
So those of you who have been
around for a while know the
EOF story better than I do,
and I know this at least
represents that we are making
some progress on the EOF front.
I don't want to take up too much time.
There are EOF-specific
sessions later in the week,
but this is just a screen
snapshot of what a typical
EOF client application looks like.
It uses Cocoa widgets very heavily.
And one uses Interface Builder
to just simply drag and make the
connections between the tables,
the table interface on the
right-hand side of your screen,
using two of the interface widgets,
and it's a very easy system to use.
It provides a tremendous amount
of flexibility because it is very
much almost code-free development.
Almost code-free,
because there is some glue code required,
and today you have to write
that glue code in Java.
But it uses mostly
Objective-C Cocoa data types.
So you can see in blue, of course,
I've highlighted the Cocoa calls.
In orange are predominantly
the calls in Java.
And typically a given window
will require between 10,
20, really lines of code.
A very complex controller object
may require 100 lines of code.
But really on average it's about 10.
There are many cases even
where it's zero lines of code.
So this is the one unfortunate
thing about today's EOF.
And we are working to fix this.
In the future,
what we want to do is to make it so
that there is no runtime inefficiencies
between Objective-C and Java.
And to make it so that we have a much
more seamless boundary between the two,
we also want to provide you with
the choice of programming language.
So you get to choose whether
you're programming in Java or
Objective-C or other languages as well.
And that, of course, means,
in many cases, of course,
having full access to the native
Objective-C data types and
not just the Java data types.
Finally, we want to hit on palette
integration so that the components
directly feel very much integrated
with IB for better productivity.
And we're going to use this to drive our
thinking on improvements to Objective-C.
Objective-C is a fabulous language.
It's a very high productivity
and allows for a great deal of
capabilities at both the low C level
and the high object-oriented level.
And we want to keep that.
We are committed to Objective-C.
It is Apple's primary language
for desktop applications.
It's one that we see the best results
in for native look and feel for getting
the most out of the Mac OS X platform.
And we have a number of
improvements we're investigating,
including things like exception handling,
garbage collection,
and other syntactic additions,
not changes, additions.
We want to improve the
interaction with other languages.
These are features that we've been
hearing from you and hearing feedback on
and we want to get more feedback on at
this conference and we want to use this
to drive Objective-C forward so that
it doesn't feel like it's lagging behind
and falling in the language marketplace.
I guess there's still some
Objective-C programmers.
Great.
Web services.
Web services are something new.
And of course,
you can't pick up a computer journal
these days without having some third
of it or two-thirds or the entire
thing being devoted to web services.
Web services really are an outgrowth,
of course, of the database and web-based
application integration,
spitting out HTML pages that has
been the predominant theme of the
Internet for the last seven years.
In the last two years,
there's been a tremendous
repurposing using XML and SOAP to
pull and separate the web services,
the data layer from
the presentation layer,
so that other applications and
other programs can read the data in.
What that means to Apple and to
development technologies is we've
needed to integrate and to extend each
of the different platform services
that we provide with additional
features so that you can easily
take advantage of web services.
So in AppleScript,
it meant adding a small vocabulary.
In C++, Objective-C,
we've added a core framework,
core services.
Java, of course,
has the famous JAX frameworks.
Later in the week,
we'll be showing you something called
WebObjects Direct-to-Web Services,
which brings the power of WebObjects
to the web service environment.
This morning, you saw Sherlock 3.
And as well, of course,
we have the Apache Tomcat Access Package
on top of the Mac OS X server.
So altogether,
this is a terrific set of environments.
Really, every one of Apple's technologies
supports web services.
So to show you what this means in
terms of integration and synergy,
I'd like to invite up... Francois
Jouel and Tim Bumgarner to
demonstrate web services with
WebObjects in AppleScript Studio.
Thank you, Ted.
What is so great about web services
is that you can take completely
different technologies and using a
couple of industry standard protocols,
which are namely XML, RPC, and SOAP,
you can use those to take those
technologies and have them work together.
Now, the problem, though,
is that it actually can be quite a bit of
work in both providing the web service,
constructing it, building it,
and then publishing it,
and on the client side,
actually consuming that service.
And what we'd like to do today is
demonstrate a solution to that problem.
And so what we're going to do,
and slides, actually.
Back to the demo.
Slides.
Thank you.
Okay.
What we're going to do is we're going
to introduce direct-to-web services.
And this is going to be
built on top of WebObjects.
And it's going to be -- enable you to
easily construct or publish your EO model
and create sophisticated Web services.
And then on the other side,
we're going to take advantage
of AppleScript Studio.
That makes it very easy
to build an application.
And we're going to leverage AppleScript's
built-in support for XML and RPC SOAP and
be able to easily create this
application and have them talk together.
So we're going to have Francois
show how easy it is to start from
scratch and build a Web service
that I'm going to then take and use.
So Francois?
Hello everybody.
I know what you're thinking.
It's 4:30 and yet another
Frenchman to listen to.
Bear with me and I'll show you how
Direct2F services is extremely cool.
So the first thing I'm going to do
is to open EOModeler and show you
the diagram view of the database
I here have on this machine.
It's a simple real estate database.
And what EOF enables me to do is
to take these database tables and
turn them into objects that are
readily available to my server.
The only thing I want to do here
is to browse the database to verify
that everything is working correctly.
And that's all I need
to do with EOModeler.
Now I'm going to start Project Builder
and create a new project from scratch.
We have added a direct
web services wizard.
And because this is a real demo,
I'm going to start with
I will name it real demo.
I will not deploy it as a J2E servlet.
The JDBC adapter is
already selected for me.
What I need to do now is add
the model I opened earlier.
Here it is.
And that's it.
That's all it took to create a complete
web services server that knows all about
this database I showed you earlier.
Project Builder compiled the
project and now started the server.
Because this server is
built on top of web objects,
it is entirely written in
Java and is totally portable.
It will run on any J2SE,
J2SE-based server.
Platform out there and can be
deployed either standalone or as
a servlet on top of a J2SE server.
This is all very nice,
but everything has been turned off in
this web service for security reasons.
To configure it,
I'm going to use the web services,
the direct web services assistant.
It is a swing-based application.
that connects remotely to the
server running in the background.
So I can now close the window for the
server and concentrate on the assistant.
On the left hand side you've
got a tree view with a default
service created for you.
I'm going to enable it.
Basically what the direct
web service assistant does,
it makes a public view of your
private business information.
On this right hand side column
you've got all your tables
that you do not want to expose.
I'm going to pick one, the listing,
and make it available to the world.
Because this is an alpha,
in alpha state I know I have to save it,
close and reconnect.
Bear with me for a moment.
Okay, now if I go back to the left column
I see that four services have been
created for me as conveniences.
If I click on one of these...
[Transcript missing]
Now,
what I can do here with these buttons is,
for example,
clone this service and customize it.
Now I have a clone.
And because I'm going
to search on zip code,
I'm going to get rid of all the
arguments but the zip code entry.
Okay,
the return values now look all good.
I want to get a lot of information
on this listing properties.
Something else I would like to display.
My database contains JPEGs for
every houses that are for sale.
I would like to display
these JPEGs on the client.
For this, I have a listing photos table
that I'm going to expose.
So here the power of EOF comes to play.
I am telling the service
to return a photo URL,
although there is no
photo URL in the database.
All I have is JPEG data.
Well,
I have added a little bit of business
logic in my enterprise object
representation of the database
so that when the data is extracted,
a new URL is returned for
it so that the client,
when it gets this URL,
can call back and get
the data from the server.
You see anything wrong, Tim?
- Nope.
- I think I'm going to save.
And move on to the test interface.
The test interface is going
to come up with two tabs.
One showing you the service WSDL.
So WSDL is a web service
description language.
It's very complex.
It's written in XML and
it's something that no human
should ever have to look at.
Unfortunately,
all the other tools out there
require you to touch the
WSDL at one point or another.
Because the main problem with the WSDL,
although it's very easy to specify
in this format the argument,
it's very hard to specify
the return values.
When you return a complex object,
you don't know the structure
of this object underneath.
Well, with direct web services and its
model representation of the database,
we have all the information necessary
to build a complete WSDL file.
I now move on to the testing tab and the
test interface built me a trivial text
field so that I can test my service.
and that's it.
It's written the listing that
is associated to this zip code.
At this stage,
a direct web service assistance
works and it's Tim's turn to
build a client on top of it.
Thank you Francois.
Great.
So what we're going to do...
and David Koehn.
We're going to take advantage
of this listing for zip code web
service that is now published.
It's out there live and we're
actually using the network and we're
going to go across and talk to that.
I'm going to start in
Project Builder and for the sake
of time we're going to move it.
It's pretty much an assembled
application but we'll finish it up.
So I'm going to launch into Interface
Builder and I've got my application here
that has a table that's already laid
out with all the columns that I want.
It's got a search field but
it's missing our find button.
So I'm going to go ahead and just
drag in a button and we get the
nice Aqua guidelines there and
I'm going to rename it to find.
Change the size a bit.
Okay, resize it over here.
And the other thing I want to do is
actually change some of the attributes.
It would be nice if it was the default
button and we can simply bring up our
attributes and set it to be a return.
So now it's got the nice
Aqua blue and we don't actually
have to click on the button.
We can hit return.
The other thing we need to
do now is to actually add our
AppleScript functionality.
And what I want to do is I want to
know when somebody clicks the button,
execute some AppleScript.
And we do that through the
AppleScript application.
So I'm going to go ahead and
click on the button and I'm going
to go ahead and add my script.
And I'm going to go ahead and
click on the button and I'm going
to go ahead and add my script.
And I'm going to go ahead and
click on the button and I'm going
to go ahead and add my script.
And I'm going to go ahead and
click on the button and I'm going
to go ahead and add my script.
And I'm going to go ahead and
click on the button and I'm going
to go ahead and add my script.
And I'm going to go ahead and
click on the button and I'm going
to go ahead and add my script.
And I'm going to go ahead and click
on the button and I'm going to go
ahead and click on the button and I'm
going to go ahead and add my script.
And the code is very simple.
I check to see which button was
clicked since I named it find.
I can see, make sure I'm in the find.
And then I'm going to actually
execute this handler that I've
created called find with zip code.
And I do that by passing in
the contents of the text field
that was my search field.
So let's take a look quickly
at the find with zip code.
and this provides some UI,
it sets up some status,
shows a progress bar.
And then the interesting part is
that I do this listings for zip code.
This is where it gets interesting.
This is where we take
advantage of XMLRPC and the
SOAP support in AppleScript.
We basically point to the URL that
we've constructed that's his web
service and using just like we do
for telling a local application,
we do tell application the application.
We set up some parameters
for the SOAP service and
then ultimately we call SOAP.
This actually takes the method
name called listings for zip code.
Let's go ahead and build and run this.
And up it comes, and I can actually
even type in wildcards.
So I'm going to put in 95 star,
click my Find button.
It's talking to its web service,
went and got those values,
populated the table,
and then I can start double-clicking
on this and actually getting that
image that he was vending from his
service and putting it into my detail.
And I just quickly look through
it for a couple of these.
Oh, let's check a look at this one here.
Oh, I'd say that this one's a little
overpriced according to that image.
All right,
you can see actually how easy it is
to take advantage of web services,
and you can build some
compelling applications.
And with that, I'd like to bring up Ted.
God,
I was getting so interested and I said,
oh yeah, that's right, I work here.
So, in summary,
we're focused on doing some
great development tools.
We work with our partners.
We provide resources to them.
We want to extend to new initiatives.
I want to invite Godfrey DiGiorgi up
to give you the full week's roadmap.
Please, please, please find Apple people
that you saw up on stage.
Give them your comments and feedback.
Find me.
We want to hear what you've got to say.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
With five different
technologies to present,
blow by blow,
these are color-coded to be the
same as what's in your program
guide and indicate the tools track,
the Java track, the WebObjects track,
some of the Core OS and
some of the lunch sessions.
Please don't forget the exhibit
fair starting this evening.
Remember the Developer Depot is also here
all week to vend the developer tools.
The next sessions that you might
be interested in attending,
the Java and Apple State of the Union,
immediately follows this
session in this hall.
Tomorrow morning we have our WebObjects
State of the Union and the Client
Web Services Framework session.
And then later in the afternoon tomorrow,
the first of our tool sessions
following this overview,
the
Command Line Development Tool session.
For more information, these are the URLs.
You'll see them in all of the
sessions through the week.
And they're also included
in the master URL list,
which shows up at the
end of every session.
That's about it.
We have no time for QA today.
We would invite you to please attend
the feedback forums on the technologies
that are of interest to you.
They're listed in your program and here
for your convenience is all the times.
And with that,
thank you very much for attending.
We hope to see you through the week.